---
layout: post
title: "Preview: <i>Black Mass</i>"
cleantitle: "Preview: Black Mass"
author: Alexander Atienza
authorurl: "/writer/AlexanderAtienza/"
date: 2015-09-04
excerpt: "Alex gives us a briefing on what to expect from Depp's latest"
image: "/images/FFP/blackmass.jpg"
displayimage: "yes"
tags: 
- newmovie
- movie
---

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Johnny Depp is due for a good film. It’s been 4 years since the last *Pirates of the Caribbean* film, and in the meanwhile we’ve had *The Rum Diary*, *The Lone Ranger*, *Transcendence*, and *Mortdecai*. Having acted in nothing but critical failures for the past 4 years, Depp has had a particularly unlucky streak. It’s possible this is a sign that character acting is on the decline or that Tim Burton has run out of ideas; either way, his career appears to be on the downside.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;That is why Depp’s latest film comes as a surprise. Based on the 2001 book by Dick Lehr and Gerard O’Neill, *Black Mass* details the true story of organized crime boss Whitey Bulger, one of South Boston’s most infamous criminals, as he attempts to take down a rival by becoming an FBI informant. As an informant, Whitey is able to evade law enforcement, consolidating his rise to power. Johnny Depp stars as the Irish-American mobster, with Joel Edgerton as FBI Agent John Connolly and Benedict Cumberbatch as his brother, Massachusetts State Senator William “Billy” Bulger. Whitey was sentenced in November 2013 to two consecutive life sentences in prison for his involvement in 19 murders.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;As usual, the film’s subject matter drew comparisons to the films of Martin Scorsese, whose films Goodfellas and The Departed set a standard for crime dramas. The somewhat early **September 18** release suggests bad faith in the film on Warner Brothers’ part; Black Mass is not the only film adaptation of material by Boston Globe reporters this year, as it will have to compete with *Spotlight*, a film detailing the Boston Globe’s coverage of the Catholic sex abuse scandals, when it is released in November. (Perhaps not coincidentally, both films are shot by cinematographer Masanobu Takayanagi.) Controversy was aroused when it was announced that Whitey’s girlfriend, Catherine Greg, who is played by Sienna Miller, would be cut out of the film, and we will see whether any narrative threads are left untied by this ablation.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Much attention has been generated by the casting of Depp as the Irish-American mobster. Footage of Depp’s performance has been praised for its novelty, though much of the praise seems to come from the fact that Depp is not wearing a silly wig or recognizably flamboyant clothing. Some lament the turn the actor’s career has taken the past ten years and approve of his return to naturalistic roles. That this casting decision is being perceived as a reaction against Depp’s image as one of the most typecast actors in Hollywood is a strength of the film that might be leveraged to hide its other weaknesses.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;According to an interview with the director in The New York Times, we can expect to see a human side of Whitey, and from the trailer we get some glimpses of the film’s variation in tone. Director Scott Cooper drew attention for his debut film Crazy Heart, which earned Jeff Bridges the Oscar for Best Actor in 2009 for his portrayal of an aging country singer. Hopefully Cooper has a talent for eliciting knockout performances from his cast, since this film will really have to martial its creative resources if it is to avoid lapsing into generic crime drama.