---
layout: post
title: "Around the Block 11/01"
author: PCI
date: 2015-11-01
excerpt: "What's going on this week in film around Philly"
image: "https://s3.amazonaws.com/moviegoer/uploads/inchoate/aroundtheblock.jpg"
displayimage: "yes"
tags: 
- feature
---
## Around Campus

#### **PCI Weekly Screening**
This week, PCI will be jumping from the ganglands of medieval Japan to a Britain of the near future. *Children of Men* (2006), directed by Oscar-winner Alfonso Cuaron, is set in a world where women have become infertile, and a former activist (Clive Owen) has to transport the last remaining pregnant woman to safety. Hailed for its long, unwavering tracking shots and impeccable production design upon release, this film is a modern classic. PCI Board member Alexander Atienza will be moderating the screening on **Thursday, November 5, 9:00pm**, at Harrison M20. 

#### Special Events
Penn Cinema Studies is organizing a couple of interesting events this week. 

On **Monday, November 2 at 6:00pm**, Todd Vanderwerff is visiting Penn at the Kelly Writer’s House. Mr. Vanderwerff is Culture Editor at VOX, and has written extensively on television for LA Times, Grantland, The AV Club and VOX. 

On **Tuesday, November 3 at 5:00pm**, there will be a screening of *The Internet’s Own Boy*, a documentary on internet hacktivist and co-founder of Reddit Aaron Swartz at Meyerson Conference Room in the second floor of Van Pelt Library. Swartz’s aggressive approach to making the Internet a freer place resulted in legal battles that led him to commit suicide at the age of 26. Prof. Peter Decherney and Jeffrey Vagle, Director, Center for Technology, Innovation & Competition at Penn Law School, will be moderating a post-screening discussion of the film. 

On **Thursday, November 5, at 3:30pm**, Pixar Animation Studios artist Matt Nolte will be visiting Drexel University’s campus. Matt is a character art director for Pixar, having worked on every one of their projects from Cars on. The event will have a special behind-the-scenes presentation of his work, followed by a Q&A session. 


#### **Gregory College House**
Gregory College House runs a [Film Culture Program](http://gregory.house.upenn.edu/film_culture) for its residents, with screenings happening every day. 

Gregory College House will be screening *Nashville* (1975), presented by student programmer Michael Molisani, on Monday, November 2nd; *Once Upon A Time In Mexico* (2003), presented by student programmer Emma Edoga, on Tuesday, November 3rd; *Henry V* (1989), presented by student programmer Ann Molin, on Wednesday, November 4th.

All films will start at 8pm on their respective dates.


#### **PhilaMOCA**

This week, PhilaMOCA is screening a post-apocalyptic science fiction film from Ethiopia that looks very interesting. [*Crumbs*](https://www.facebook.com/events/1667372620171984/), directed by Miguel Llanso, centers around Gagano, a survivor of a post-apocalyptic event, who sets out on a hero’s journey that has several obstacles, most of which are thrown in by the filmmaker himself. Llanso has been a fringe mainstay of the international film festival circuit since 2011, and he’s one of the few filmmakers who choose to film in Africa. The screening will be on **Wednesday, November 4, at 7:30pm**. 


## Around the City

#### **This Week at the Ritz**

We are well in the throes of the best season for films; films that have been playing at various film festivals in previous months finally make their way to theaters. This week is no exception. 

[*Victoria*](http://www.landmarktheatres.com/philadelphia/film-info/victoria), the audacious post-modern German neo-noir that’s all done in a single shot, is quite simply cinematic awesomeness according to our Editor-in-Chief, Brad Pettigrew, and must be watched on the big screen at Ritz at the Bourse. 

[*Room*](http://www.landmarktheatres.com/philadelphia/film-info/room), winner of the People’s Choice Award at this year’s Toronto Film Festival, features Brie Larson in a career-defining performance as Joy Newsome, a woman who has been making the most of her situation as a captive for the last seven years of her life. Director Lenny Abrahamson smartly sticks to Joy’s son Jack’s perspective through the movie, and it has some of the most incredibly tense sequences on any film this year. It’s playing at Ritz Five. 

Independent auteur Michael Almereyda is back with his latest feature, [*Experimenter*](http://www.landmarktheatres.com/philadelphia/film-info/experimenter), based on the life of behavioral scientist Stanley Milgram. Peter Sarsgaard, that extremely underrated actor, headlines this story as Milgram, a scientist who was interested in questions of obedience and authority in human nature, and it has a cast that includes Winona Ryder, Jim Gaffigan and Anton Yelchin. The reviews highlight Almereyda’s free-flowing formal style, having Milgram talk straight to the camera at times, and surrealistic atmosphere. It’s playing at Ritz at the Bourse. 



