---
layout: post
title: "Around the Block 11/15"
author: PCI
date: 2015-11-15
excerpt: "What's going on this week in film around Philly"
image: "/images/aroundtheblock.jpg"
displayimage: "yes"
tags:
- feature
---
##Around Campus

####**PCI Weekly Screening**
This week, PCI will be screening Anurag Kashyap’s *Dev.D*. A modern take on the classic Bengali novel Devdas, *Dev.D* tells the story Dev, a drug addict who struggles to make the best of his life after a complicated relationship when he meets Chanda, a self-destructive teenage prostitute. This critical and commercial hit is one of the highlights of a new era of Indian filmmaking, thanks to its fearless visual style and its main performances. PCI Board member Shreshth Khilani will be moderating the screening on **Thursday, November 19, 9:00pm**, at Harrison M20.


####**Gregory College House**
Gregory College House runs a [Film Culture Program](http://gregory.house.upenn.edu/film_culture) for its residents, with screenings happening every day. 

This week they will be screening Inglorious Basterds on Monday, 11/16, L.A. Confidential on Tuesday, 11/17, Touch of Evil on Wednesday, 11/18, and Captain America: The Winter Soldier on Thursday, 11/19.
All films will start at 8pm on their respective dates.



####**International House**

The highlight of this week is still the Philadelphia Asian American film festival, which ends this Wednesday, 11/18. More details, including a full schedule on the [official site](http://www.phillyasianfilmfest.org).


##Around the City

####**This Week at the Ritz**

There is still time to catch up with some of the season’s most important releases. Some recurring titles that are worth a look are *Spotlight*, *Bridge of Spies*, *Victoria*, *The Assassin* and others. But this week will see two interesting new releases: the crime flick *Legend*, starring Tom Hardy in a double role as the infamous Kray twins, and *Carol*, Todd Haynes’s latest film which has been getting rave reviews ever since it premiered at the Cannes Film Festival.




