---
layout: post
title: "Around the Block 10/18"
author: PCI
date: 2015-10-18
excerpt: "What's going on this week in film around Philly"
image: "https://s3.amazonaws.com/moviegoer/uploads/inchoate/aroundtheblock.jpg"
displayimage: "yes"
tags: 
- feature
---
##Around Campus

####**PCI Weekly Screening**
We at Penn Cinema Initiative and The Moviegoer are organizing an outing to one of the most-buzzed films at the festival: Room. Lenny Abrahamson’s Room is the story of Jack and his mother, Ma, who have been held in captivity by a kidnapper for seven years. After they execute an escape from their confines, Jack has to contend with something even more exciting and terrifying: the outside world. Room most recently won the People’s Choice Award at the 2015 Toronto International Film Festival, and we are extremely happy to give our members the opportunity to catch the film at the festival! Room will be screening on **Friday, October 23rd at 7:15pm**. We will keep you updated on how to attend the screening with us!


####**Special Event**
This week, the Cinema Studies Department, in association with Slought, is bringing a distinguished Indian experimental filmmaker to campus. Ashish Avikunthak has been making art films for the last twenty years, and his work has been screened all over the world. There will be a screening of Avikunthak’s 2013 film *Rati Chakravyuh*, followed by a discussion with Penn Professor Rahul Mukherjee and Shekhar Deshpande, from Arcadia University. The screening is on **Thursday, Oct. 22, at 3.30pm**, with the conversation happening at 6:00pm. 


####**Gregory College House**
Continuing their semester-long [Film Culture Program](http://gregory.house.upenn.edu/film_culture), Gregory College House is screening *12 Angry Men* (1957) on **Monday, October 19th**, presented by student Michael Molisani; *The Darjeeling Limited* (2007), on **Tuesday, October 20th**, presented by student Emma Edoga; *The Great Dictator* (1941), on **Wednesday, October 21st**, presented by student Ann Molin; *Captain America: The First Avenger* (2011), on **Thursday, October 22nd**, presented by student Breanna Hirschoot. You can’t go wrong with any of them.

All films will start at 8:00pm on their respective dates.


####**International House of Philadelphia**

IHP’s offerings for this week are quite sparse, but there is an exciting screening this **Thursday, 10/22 at 7:00pm** of the film that won the 2015 World Cinema Documentary Directing Award at Sundance Film Festival: [*Dreamcatcher*](http://ihousephilly.org/calendar/dreamcatcher). The film is set in the world of sex trafficking and prostitution and one of its survivors, Brenda Myers-Powell. Director Kim Longinotto will also be in attendance at the screening, which is why we think it’s worth catching. 


##Around the City

####**PhilaMoca**
The Philadelphia Mausoleum for Contemporary Art (PhilaMOCA) has a couple of zany picks for the week. 

On **Thursday, Oct. 22**, it will be screening the documentary [*Diary of a Deadbeat* (2015)](http://diaryofadeadbeat.brownpapertickets.com), a movie surrounding the life of underground exploitation filmmaker Jim Van Bebber, known for his gritty pulp films of the ‘70s and ‘80s. Director Victor Bonacore will be in attendance at the screening.

On **Friday, Oct. 23**, PhilaMOCA has a [horror double bill](https://www.facebook.com/events/1479762435662838/) that looks batshit insane. First, it will be screening *Frankenhooker* (1990), a B-movie twist on the Frankenstein tale, which features a medical school dropout bringing his decapitated fiancee back to life by building her a new body out of the parts of Manhattan street hookers. If that sounds unimaginable, we strongly advise you to watch the trailer; it’s very real. The second film on the double bill is *Alpha Girls* (2013), a slasher film centered around the pledges of a college sorority. It doesn’t look at twisted as Frankenhooker, but it looks like a lot of blood will be shed. 

####**This Week at the Ritz**

Two amazing films, heralding the beginning of awards season, have hit Old City. 

Enter [*Steve Jobs*](http://www.landmarktheatres.com/philadelphia/ritz-five/film-info/steve-jobs), Aaron Sorkin’s dizzying take on one of the late geniuses of our generation. Sorkin upends the structure of the traditional biopic by staging the the film around three product launches – the Macintosh II, the NeXT computer, and the iMac. The talent of this film is nothing short of amazing, with Danny Boyle, Michael Fassbender, Kate Winslet, Seth Rogen and Jeff Daniels in it. 

Netflix might have changed the model of movie distribution around the world, and now it has taken its next step to total cinematic domination. [*Beasts of No Nation*](http://www.landmarktheatres.com/philadelphia/ritz-five/film-info/beasts-of-no-nation), the first film released by Netflix, has hit both theaters and Netflix Instant simultaneously, and is the latest experiment from the producers of quality TV shows like *House of Cards* and *Daredevil*. Beasts is directed by *True Detective* auteur Cary Joji Fukunaga and stars Idris Elba as a West African military commander who leads a group of child soldiers in a civil war. It is unflinching, uncompromising, and heartpounding, as indicated by critics. 



