---
layout: post
title: "Recap: <i>Raging Bull</i>"
cleantitle: "Recap: Raging Bull"
author: Olatunbosun Osinaike
authorurl: "/writer/OlaOsinaike/"
date: 2015-09-21
excerpt: "A recap of what was covered at our Raging Bull screening this past Thursday"
image: "https://s3.amazonaws.com/moviegoer/uploads/inchoate/rbrecap.png"
displayimage: "yes"
tags: 
- feature
- popular
---

*Martin Scorsese’s Raging Bull takes audiences on a life changing epiphany that the director himself experienced prior to the film’s conception. The film’s stylistic portrayal of judgment, and its approach to mimicking the warfare of boxing, reminds us of the inner wrath contained within the psychology of a boxer. And although Scorsese’s style is simply an approach, the film continues to stand out as a lasting piece of cinema due to the auteur’s understanding of the character’s plight: facing the judgment of his own wrath.*

### The Sound of Silence
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Scorsese’s use of silence is one of the distinct choices that audiences can pinpoint as his influence over the story’s cinematic interpretation. Rather than emphasizing sound by amplifying it, reducing the scope of the sound has a much more memorable impact. It makes the character’s beating in the ring almost an ethical punishment. And the choice to intercut his wife’s reaction (a regretful weeping) gives the scene a moral significance. 

### Cutting Time
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The historical aspects of the film’s production are also very important. After reviewing the script - written by the boxer, as well as Paul Shrader and Mardik - Scorsese chose to scrap much of the original screenplay. Most of what was cut dealt with the boxer’s early life: his relationship with his father, and the rugged upbringing that led him to have such an aggressive attitude. But what did cutting much of biography have to do with the film’s edification?

### And now I can see
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;At the end of the film, Scorsese gives the audience a story to ponder: the parable of the Pharisees. The Pharisees were a group of religious Jews who, during the time of Jesus, denied the Savior because they believed more in the Scriptures than in the existence of God as a present being. Scorsese makes the decision to place the parable at the end of the film, which raises many philosophical questions regarding LaMotta’s journey. So why does Scorsese place a religious lesson at the of an autobiographical sports film?

### The Misogynist and the Martyr 
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;One of the lingering questions about the film concerns its treatment of women. Within the narrative, LaMotta’s wife, the sole primary female character, experiences spousal abuse and it’s not until the end of the film that she finally stands up for herself. The moral ambiguity of the story circles around whether the film is simply true to LaMotta’s story, or misogynist in its portrayal of marriage. But, if we were to take a look at the film’s psychological impact on the audience the brutal portrayal of Jake’s dominance over his wife opens a doorway into audience’s understanding of what marriage is as an institution just as Jake’s tumultuous relationship with his brother pushes the audience to reconsider their own sibling related issues. If Scorsese is making an attempt to teach based on LaMotta’s mistakes, perhaps exposing the audience to the brutality is what gives them inspiration to find their own redemption. 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;This ties back into the Parable of the Pharisees. The Pharisees were a group that taught Scripture without fully understanding the Spirit of God. So, an explanation for the film’s supposed impartiality towards abuse is not that Scorsese is glamourizing violence, but more so that he understands that an attempt to preach against abuse would be ineffective. The true way to instill the lesson in the audience is to allow them to suffer the experience of the unfiltered cruelty, so that they might be redeemed in their own personal reaction.

### In the End…
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;My theory is that the film is simply a vehicle for audiences to experience the redemption LaMotta never could. From an ethical standpoint, it almost seems that Jake LaMotta’s sins catch up to him and that the film’s conclusion is a morally bound simulation, despite the film’s autobiographical element; it’s less about recounting Jake LaMotta’s career and more of a spiritual cleansing for the audience. We see the destructive choices LaMotta makes: his familial abuse, his paranoia, his ‘raging bull’ persona. The film lets us observe how his life falls apart as a result of his goal driven decision-making, but as the audience, we get the second chance LaMotta never claimed. 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In one of the final scenes in the film shows LaMotta is trapped in prison, a shadow of himself and his former boxing successes. He’s fully aware of what’s he’s lost, and so is the audience. But rather than end the film here, where the focal point would be LaMotta’s failed career, Scorsese chooses instead to end the film on a more significant, more relatable note: the loss of his LaMotta’s family. In a later scene, Jake encounters his brother Joey many years after LaMotta’s boxing career has ended; they’ve both moved on, but the pervading silence between Jake and his brother Joey speaks volumes about the true failure of his career: that the pursuit of his boxing success made him forget the true treasures he already possessed.  

