---
layout: post
title: "Scorsese's Voyage"
cleantitle: "Scorsese's Voyage"
author: Olatunbosun Osinaike
authorurl: "/writer/OlaOsinaike/"
date: 2015-09-15
excerpt: "When reflecting on Scorsese’s Voyage to Italy, it’s important to consider this question: how do we relate different modes of filmmaking?"
image: "https://s3.amazonaws.com/moviegoer/uploads/inchoate/scor.jpg"
displayimage: "yes"
tags: 
- feature
---

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;When reflecting on Scorsese’s *Voyage to Italy*, it’s important to consider this question: how do we relate different modes of filmmaking? Sure, it’s true that many of the films discussed in Scorsese’s anthology are of the Italian Neorealism film movement. However, their influence on Scorsese’s era in the history of cinema - Hollywood’s New Wave – is just as important. Films not only reflect on the times in which they were made, they are reincarnated in the cinema they influence. Perhaps the best way to truly appreciate Scorsese’s anthology is to observe how the films that he considered reappear in his own filmography.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Film history shows us that cinema didn’t start out as a collection of entertaining and reflective narratives, but actually as a mode of study for other subjects. Etienne Marey and Eadweard Muybridge’s studies of animal motion led to the discovery that the compilation of closely related and timed images can lead to the illusion of movement.  In the same way, if we think of the films of the past as frames in a movement, the films of the future are the closely related frames that finish the movement in the motion picture. So we might say Scorese’s films are just as important as the Neorealist films in understanding the genre’s genesis because they accomplish the completion of the ‘movement’ of the Neorealist era.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Timothy Corrigan mentions in *The Film Experience* that films can act as social barometers. And after the recent international economic meltdown in the 2000s, many expected Scorsese to use *The Wolf of Wall Street* as a criticism on those responsible for the financial collapse. Yet, after watching the film and its honest depiction of the moral vulgarity within that system, audiences chastised Scorsese for what seemed to be moral impartiality. However, I believe that like Visconti’s *Days of Glory*, Scorsese wanted to make a picture that was honest to the time it was reflecting. Besides, having watched it about ten times, I myself was one of many who found the story’s lewdness quite exciting. 

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;So maybe Scorsese’s take on Wall Street, as well as everyone’s perception of the film, was bound to be personal, whether they applaud its coarseness, disgust at its rage, or appreciate its honesty. The influence of other Italian Neorealist films can be seen in Scorsese’s filmography: the opposite framing of Madolyn and Det. Sullivan in *The Departed* demonstrates emotional distance, mimicking De Sica’s framing of father and son post-slap in *The Bicycle Thieves*; the sacredness of communal eating, as seen in the prison pasta scene of Goodfellas, resembles the mass fishing scene in Rossellini’s *Stromboli*.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Just as every country has a founding myth, here too we might find a good one for cinema: the emotional resonance of a film is like the frames within a moving picture, all of which when put together, create the illusion of a universal film movement - in which every new film banks on the momentum of the past ‘frames,’ furthering the emotional and moral lessons of films past.

*Penn Cinema Initiative will be screening Scorsese's Raging Bull this [Thursday, 9/17, at 6PM](https://www.facebook.com/events/1628996490721073/) in the Harrison Sky Lounge.*
 


