---
layout: post
title: "<i>The Birds</i>"
cleantitle: "The Birds"
author: Olatunbosun Osinaike
authorurl: "/writer/OlaOsinaike/"
date: 2015-12-09
excerpt: "The film isn’t simply about an apocalypse — it’s about animalistic crowning and worship across species: the birds in the film worship Melanie, and the tension that arises due to the birds’ inability to control their urges leads to the utmost consequences."
image: "https://s3.amazonaws.com/moviegoer/uploads/inchoate/thebirds.jpg"
displayimage: "yes"
tags: 
- movie
- classicmovie
---

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Alfred Hitchcock’s *The Birds* is one of his most renowned masterpieces. The film is one of the first of its kind – the apocalyptic; though unlike today’s hackneyed variant, *The Birds* does not just center on this idea of the beginning of the end, but rather it explores its own small universe, in this case just a town - only later radio reports inform the audience that this dangerous atmosphere is slowly expanding. Even more apparent, and important, is the allegorical message of Hitchcock's story, which, in quite a twist for a genre that wasn’t even yet fully defined, portrays Melanie one of the birds herself. The film isn’t simply about an apocalypse — it’s about animalistic crowning and worship across species: the birds in the film worship Melanie, and the tension that arises due to the birds’ inability to control their urges leads to the utmost consequences.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The symbolism that defines Melanie as object of affection starts in the very first sequence of the film. At the bird shop, a boy whistles at Melanie and near simultaneously, the birds being chirping at Melanie - from the timing of that anthropomorphic gesture, we can infer that the birds are attracted to Melanie in some manner. That interest gradually inflates over the course of the film.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The framing of Melanie in the bird shop positions her figure against a background of trees and figs. In addition, the arrangement of her hair and the shade of her lipstick are visually birdlike. The formulation of Melanie as a bird helps enlighten the audience as to why this attack is happening: Melanie is being tormented in part due to the semi-sexual obsession the birds have; they see her almost as their queen, but the expression of their affection comes off as ominous, their attacks on other human beings intentional. However, their affection for Melanie is simply a will to taste and feel her. They idolize her.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Thus, the birds can be seen to have a loosely sexual relationship with Melanie, under which their various attacks serve a different function. And although this theory does not suggest malign towards Melanie, this sexual obsession depends on a much heavier anthropomorphization of the birds. Any animal can idolize a being of their own species: bees have their queens, wolves have their alpha, but the idea that they can be sexually attracted to Melanie suggests they see her as a other in wholly distinct, pure and exalted form.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Hitchcock uses the film as a social commentary on the effects of fame. The relationship between Melanie and the birds is the foremost metaphor for the way in which fans of a famous celebrity attempt to consume their image. And although they mean praise, the effect is almost damning: all types of birds unite in their idolization of Melanie; the twisted morality of the metaphor is that the masses are united in their admiration-abuse.  By the end of the film, Melanie is in shock at her consumption, but not destroyed. We can understand her to have a different relationship with the birds because, unlike some of the other victims, she’s not murdered by the birds. They had the opportunity to kill her when they isolate her in the attic, but they seem to peck at her without the intention of murdering her. Melanie’s inability to fight back comes to represent the confused appreciation a celebrity might have towards fame and notoriety: allowing themselves to be eaten, only breaking down to pressure in private.